---

---
#### __**The Lord Shall Smite Thee!: Kendrick Lamar’s Problem of Evil**__



How could a loving God allow suffering? Theologians have considered such a question for hundreds of years. As one struggles through the senseless fears, abuses, and pains of life, it is only natural to question why an all-loving God would allow massive evil. Kendrick Lamar Duckworth, a contemporary rap artist, explores the implications of communicating evil in his track “FEAR.” from the 2018 Pulitzer Prize for Music winning album “DAMN.” The album as a whole employs grand instrumentals, creative lyricism, and experimental progrogression techniques to explore social issues that face the black community, and tangentially, Lamar’s reaction to his own successful life. “FEAR.” specifically centers around a fictional version of Kendrick and his uncle that share a distant yet caring relationship. The author is an artist and social critic, Lamar himself, addressing social issues in the world and in Compton; His foil is Carl Duckworth, Lamar’s cousin, a Balck Hebrew Israelite pastor in the Compton community.  In his track, “FEAR.,” Lamar uses flashback storytelling, hymn-like incantation, and religious allegory, as well as juxtaposition with Judaic theodicies, in order to show that biblical suffering throughout his life contradicts the existence of an all-loving God.



Lamar uses incantations that resemble religious prayer and preach in order to present the perspective that his life is in contradiction to the existence of an all-loving God. In his chorus, Lamar presents a plea to God which is sung both forwards and backwards. “Why God, why God do I gotta suffer? Pain in my heart carry burdens full of struggle” (Lamar 15-16) The voice of these lines is pleading to God for an answer; why must God allow Lamar to go through so much suffering? And if God is omnibenevolent as described by the prevailing religion in Lamar’s community, does that mean that Lamar’s suffering is illegitimate? It is implied that his pain is both physical and mental, and that has been continuous throughout his life. Perhaps Lamar has concluded that the religions around him provide no real answer to the problems that he faces, but that they do provide others with reassurance. It is also evident that Kendrick does not currently see his tribulations as justified, because he has attempted to love and engage with those around him. Lamar’s delivery is reminiscent of his implicit experiences in church, in that it reminds the listener of prayer or hymn singing. When repeated backwards, the lines transform into tongues, which allows the voice to change from Lamar’s into a more theologically knowledgeable identity. The song is meant to be interpreted as a critique of religion as a solution to non-existential fear, and its ability to solve immediate suffering. Ultimately though, the questions presented in the chorus as a whole set up a context for Kendrick’s rumination on his past.



Duckworth also explicates the suffering of his early life through flashback storytelling and lyrical repetition, in order to prove its contrast to the belief in an omnibenevolent God. In the opening verse of the song, after Carl Duckworth has just called to explain the existence of God, Kendrick raps an imitation of his mother’s threats of violent punishment for wrongdoing during childhood. “Go back outside, I beat yo' ass, lil' nigga. That homework better be finished, I beat yo' ass. Your teachers better not be bitchin' 'bout you in class” (Lamar 35-37) His mother here represents the God that judges and punishes him for doing poorly, which confuses young Kendrick. This recollection gives rise to the author’s theme that loving gods often have contradictory goals: here, for instance, his mother’s punishment gets in the way of his capacity to fulfill her requirements. Although she loves Kendrick, she uses violence as the answer. This is in his view flawed, and is the result of societal expectations (monetary value, education, etc.), perhaps in the same way that people project their own values onto the idea of god. Either way, Kendrick reminisces on the impact this had on his life: it created a sense of paranoia because his mother's domestic abuse taught him perverse trust. This has caused him continuous “FEAR.” even to this day, hence the name of the track. Applied to theology, Kendrick shows that God is a construct of society, and that punishment by God is not loving or good, but instead perverse. The punishment by his allegorical God itself (violent beating) and its necessity mentioned by Carl show that the world is not Good, and instead apathetic to the phenomena of both good and evil. The poetic representation of the author’s difficult childhood is used as a means to juxtapose a hopeful existential belief in a higher power.



The artist employs stark juxtaposition of his and Carl’s existential beliefs in order to demonstrate the absurdity of a belief in an all-good God. Lamar is explicitly discussing the themes of his music that are the most popular amongst listeners, specifically his existential fears of being an artist and living an improper life. “'Cause my DNA won't let me involve in the light of God / I'm talkin' fear, fear that my humbleness is gone / I'm talkin' fear, fear that love ain't livin' here no more / I'm talkin' fear, fear that it's wickedness or weakness” (Lamar 110-113). The character here is discussing the implications of the Christian utopian mindset to strive for a better, more loving future. Here Carl’s ideology is juxtaposed with Kendrick’s childhood; his pedagogy and social pressure prohibits him from being holy. Furthermore, Carl’s identity as a Black Hebrew Israelite reveals to Kendrick that despite his success, there are still divine conflicts in his life. In Carl’s view Kendrick has an implied choice to resolve his fears: either go against the teachings of God, and be evil yet powerful and strong in the face of a difficult life, or follow them and find existential power yet lack social clout or the ability to defend himself from danger. Lamar attempts to resolve these contradictions in the line “Love ain't living here no more” which has two interpretations. Either he must leave the cursed environment of his past in favor of an Enlightened future, or that there is no Enlightened future at all and therefore no loving God. Despite its absurd contradictions, Lamar believes that there is some power in theological belief.



By comparing his own fate to that of Jesus in the Bible, Kendrick creates a religious allegory that demonstrates the power of belief in an imperfect God in the face of terror. He explores his fear of death, particularly his mindset around death growing up in a violent environment. “I'll prolly die because these colors are standin' out / I'll prolly die because I ain't know Demarcus was snitchin' / I'll prolly die at these house parties, fuckin' with bitches / I'll prolly die from witnesses leavin' me falsely accused” (Lamar 59-62). Lamar’s fear of death is not only literal, but also figurative; he has existential dread around the idea of dying having lived a meaningless life, from meaningless, nihilistic or random causes. He turns to God for an answer to these questions, which results in a sort of religious allegory. Kendrick takes the position of a prophet, surrounded, as the Hebrew Israelites would say, by blasphemous people. He dies for the sins chosen by his social environment: for “fuckin’ with bitches,” for others bearing false witness. “Demarcus” is Judas from the bible: symbolizing the choice to betray Christ and the holy redemption. Kendrick sees the Christianity in his life, but denies embracing it fully due to the presence of evil in his life. He reaches a theological standstill which is irreconcilable yet universal; the contradictions within his belief reflect the contradictions within his life.
As a lyricist, Kendrick demonstrates his prowess for the art: he uses incantation, flashback storytelling, juxtaposition, and allegory to explicate the deep theological work of the Black Hebrew Israelites. He universalizes his experience in a way that most philosophers can’t, by making his work accessible and engaging the listener directly. The motifs are both evident and mysterious, by way of direct and symbolic references to his life. Themes of redemption intertwine with hope, fear, and dread. Above all, the work represents the contradictions of good and evil, belief and anguish, punishment and forgiveness. Lamar reflects on religion implicitly throughout the work, without resorting to the philosophical suicide that there is an all-loving God.

---

#### __**Works Cited**__

> Kendrick Lamar Duckworth. “FEAR.” *DAMN, *Top Dawg Entertainment, 2017. *Spotify, **[https://open.spotify.com/track/23luOrEVHMfoX0AhfbQuS6?si=ZX8VLju4TRChVODVbVRbmA](https://open.spotify.com/track/23luOrEVHMfoX0AhfbQuS6?si=ZX8VLju4TRChVODVbVRbmA)*
